# Exercise 1 - Docker

In this first exercise, you will build [Docker](https://docs.docker.com/guides/docker-overview/) images for the client and server applications.

Docker images are the building blocks of containers and are used to package applications and their dependencies. Containers are lightweight, portable, and isolated environments that can be run locally or on cloud platforms like Google Cloud, AWS, Azure with the help of container orchestration tools like Kubernetes. Kubernetes will be covered in a later exercise.

## Pre-requisites

Make sure you have [Docker](https://docs.docker.com/get-docker/) installed on your machine.

## Build Docker images

To build the Docker images, run the `docker build` command for each of the services at the root of the `/devops` directory:

```sh
# Build the client image
docker build -t workshop-client:0.0.1 ./client

# Build the server image
docker build -t workshop-server:0.0.1 ./server
```

> 💡 **Note:** The `-t` flag is used to tag the image with a name and version.
> In a real project the tag would be dynamic and could be set to the commit hash or the build number.

## Verify Docker images

To verify that the images have been built successfully, run the `docker images` command:

```sh
docker images | grep "workshop-"
```

You should see the `workshop-client` and `workshop-server` images listed with the version `0.0.1`.

## Manually run the Docker images

To manually run the Docker images, use the `docker run` command:

```sh
# Run the client image and map port 1234 to the container port 80
docker run -d -p 1234:80 --name workshop-client workshop-client:0.0.1

# Run the server image and map port 3000 to the container port 3000
docker run -d -p 3000:3000 --name workshop-server workshop-server:0.0.1
```

> 💡 **Note:** The `-d` flag is used to run the container in detached mode
> and the `--name` flag is used to give the container a name for easy reference.

## Verify the running containers

Go to [http://localhost:1234](http://localhost:1234) and [http://localhost:3000/data](http://localhost:3000/data) in your browser to verify that the client and server containers are running successfully.

## Stop the running containers

To stop the running containers, use the `docker stop` command:

```sh
# Stop the containers
docker stop workshop-client
docker stop workshop-server
```

Finally remove the containers to clean up:

```sh
# Remove the containers
docker rm workshop-client
docker rm workshop-server
```

## Next steps

In the next exercise, you will learn how to use Docker Compose to manage multi-container applications and run them locally.
