# Exercise 2 - Docker Compose

Docker Compose is a tool for defining and running multi-container Docker applications. With Compose, you use a YAML file to configure your application's services. Then, with a single command, you create and start all the services from your configuration.

## Pre-requisites

Make sure you have [Docker](https://docs.docker.com/get-docker/) and [Docker Compose](https://docs.docker.com/compose/install/) installed on your machine.

## 1. Create a Docker Compose file

Create a new file named `docker-compose.yml` in the `/devops` directory with the following content:

```yaml
version: "3.8"

services:
  client:
    build: ./client
    volumes:
      - "./docker-nginx.conf:/etc/nginx/nginx.conf"
    networks:
      - default
    ports:
      - "1234:80"

  server:
    build: ./server
    networks:
      - default

networks:
  default:
```

This file defines two services: `client` and `server` that build the corresponding images from the `client` and `server` directories based on the Dockerfiles.

The `client` service acts as an ingress (aka entrypoint) for the whole application by exposing the port `1234` to the host machine.

If you peek inside the `/client/Dockerfile` you can see that we use [Nginx](https://docs.nginx.com/nginx/admin-guide/web-server/reverse-proxy/) as a web server to serve the static files and proxy the requests to the API server.

We don't define any ports for the `server` so it is not directly exposed to the host machine, but it is accessible via the client service.
Both services can communicate with each other using the `default` network.

This concept is known as a reverse proxy, where the ingress service forwards the requests to one or multiple services within the same network.

The services are accessible by their service names: `client` and `server`.
So for example the client service can access the API server service by using the `http://server:3000` URL within the network.

Next, we need to create a configuration file for Nginx that will be used by the `client` service.

Create `docker-nginx.conf` in the `/devops` directory with the following content:

```nginx
http {
  # Include mime types for .js, .css, .json files, etc.
  include mime.types;

  server {
    listen 80;
    listen [::]:80;
    server_name localhost;
    root /usr/share/nginx/html;
    index index.html;

    # Serve static files directly
    location / {
      try_files $uri $uri/ /index.html;
    }

    location /api {
      # Proxy pass to API server
      proxy_pass http://server:3000;

      # Remove /api from path
      rewrite ^/api/?(.*) /$1 break;
    }
  }
}

# This block is needed by Nginx to start for some reason...
events {}
```

## 2. Build and run the Docker Compose services

To build and run both services, use the following command in the `/devops` directory:

```sh
docker compose up --build
```

> 💡 **Note:** If you make any changes to the source files you need to stop the containers and run the above command again.

## 3. Verify the running containers

Go to [http://localhost:1234](http://localhost:1234) and verify that the application is running correctly and the data from the API is displayed in the UI.

## 4. Stop the running containers

To stop the running containers, use the following command:

```sh
docker compose down
```

## Next steps

In the next exercise, you will learn how to setup Minikube for deploying containerized applications to Kubernetes locally.
