# Exercise 5 - Liveness, Readiness and Startup Probes

In this exercise we will learn how to configure [liveness, readiness and startup probes](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/configuration/liveness-readiness-startup-probes/) for a Kubernetes application. These probes are used to determine the health of the application and to manage its lifecycle.

- **Liveness probe**: Liveness probes determine when to restart a container. For example, liveness probes could catch a deadlock, when an application is running, but unable to make progress.
- **Readiness probe**: Readiness probes determine when a container is ready to start accepting traffic. This is useful when waiting for an application to perform time-consuming initial tasks, such as establishing network connections, loading files, and warming caches.
- **Startup probe**: Used to verify whether the application within a container is started. This can be used to adopt liveness checks on slow starting containers, avoiding them getting killed by the kubelet before they are up and running.

## 1. Add probe endpoints to the server

Add a `/health` endpoint to the server that returns a 200 status code (and optionally a response with some JSON data). This endpoint will be used to test the liveliness probe.

```js
app.get("/healthz", (req, res) => {
  res.json({ ok: true });
});
```

Next add a `/uptimez` endpoint that also returns a 200 status code and checks that all the necessary services are up and running, such as the database and the storage bucket. This endpoint will be used to test the readiness probe.

We don't have a database or a storage bucket in this example, so you can just return a simple response.

```js
app.get("/uptimez", (req, res) => {
  /**
   * Check that all the necessary services are up and running:
   * - Database
   * - Storage bucket
   * - Etc.
   */
  res.json({ uptime: process.uptime() });
});
```

After this, you need to rebuild the server image with incremented tag and then upload the new image to minikube.

## 2. Add probes to resource definitions

Add the following probes to the `templates/server-deployment.yaml` file into server container template:

```yaml
livenessProbe:
  httpGet:
    port: 3000
    path: /healthz
  initialDelaySeconds: 3
  periodSeconds: 3
```

Then you can go to `helm/values.yaml` and update the server tag to the tag you specified in the previous section.
Now you can go ahead and run `terraform apply` and after it has completed you should see something like this:

```yaml
...
Ready:          True
Restart Count:  0
Liveness:       http-get http://:3000/healthz delay=3s timeout=1s period=3s #success=1 #failure=3
...
```

in the output of `kubectl describe pod/server-<something>`.
