# Exercise 6 - Secrets with NGINX Ingress Basic Auth

In this exercise we will configure basic auth to our NGINX ingress using Kubernetes [secrets](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/configuration/secret/).
In NGINX Ingress, basic auth is configured using ingress [annotations](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/overview/working-with-objects/annotations/) that tell the ingress controller, which ingresses need to be configured with basic auth enabled and where to find the credentials.

- **Secrets**: as you probably guessed they are objects that contain small sensitive pieces of data such as api tokens, passwords etc.
- **Annotations**: annotations are non-identifying pieces of metadata attached to different kind of resources. Usually annotations are used to contain configuration that is not specific to the resource itself, but rather used by some other system, in our case the ingress controller.

It must be noted that more often the secrets are used by mounting them onto the container filesystem via [volumes](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/storage/volumes/), but we will look into them more in the next exercise.


## 1. Create a Secret

First we need to create the credentials in format that NGINX Ingress understands using `htpasswd`.
This can be done by running:

```sh
htpasswd -c /tmp/auth
```

which will create new credentials file for user `admin` with whatever password you specified in `/tmp/auth`.
You can take a look of the contents of the file as well.

Now you can add new resource definition to helm chart by adding file `helm/templates/basic-auth.yaml` with contents:

```yaml
{{ if .Values.basicAuth }}
apiVersion: v1
kind: Secret
data:
  auth: {{ .Values.basicAuth | b64enc }}
metadata:
  name: basic-auth
{{ end }}
```

This will create the secret only if you have specified basic auth credentials in values.
Now we need to bind the file contents to the secret value, which can be done with terraform.
Add the following block to `main.tf` in helm release resource:

```terraform
set {
  name = "basicAuth"
  value = sensitive(file("/tmp/auth"))
}
```

which will set `basicAuth` value to file contents of `/tmp/auth` and mark it as sensitive so terraform won't expose its value in the plan.


## 2. Configure the ingress

To configure the ingress you need to add couple annotations to the ingress resource.
They can also be wrapped in an `if`-statement similarly as in secret.
So add the following to `helm/templates/ingress` under annotations:

```yaml
{{ if .Values.basicAuth }}
nginx.ingress.kubernetes.io/auth-type: basic
nginx.ingress.kubernetes.io/auth-secret: basic-auth
nginx.ingress.kubernetes.io/auth-realm: 'Authentication Required'
{{ end }}
```

Now you should be all set to run `terraform apply`.


## 3. Testing the changes

When you check `http://taito-devops-workshop.local/` in your browser, you should be prompted for credentials and when you enter them you should be able to access the site.
Note, that there might be some browser caching that leaves the page itself visible even after these changes.

Now you can also comment out (with #) the basic auth block in `main.tf` and reapply the changes and the site should no longer prompt for credentials.
